socketmaster(1) -- Zero downtime restart for your apps
======================================================

## SYNOPSIS

`socketmaster` [-listen=URI] [-command=PATH] [-start=MILLIS] [-syslog]

## DESCRIPTION

socketmaster is a generic solution to the restart problem: you want to restart
your app but neither lose any active connection nor refuse new connections.

socketmaster opens the socket you want to listen on and passes it onto your
program. Because socketmaster is simple enough it doesn't need to be restarted
and can keep your file-descriptor indefinitely open.

  * `-command`=PATH:
    Defines the location of the program to execute and pass the file-descriptor
    onto. If you need to add arguments to the program, use -- before the command specific
    arguments or use a wrapper script.

    e.g.
    socketmaster -command <command>

  * `-listen`=ADDR:
    Depending on the number of times it's passed the child will get 0-N
    sockets.

    Examples:
      :8080
      fd://3
      tcp://:8945
      tcp4://localhost:8945
      tcp6://localhost:8945
      unix:///tmp/myapp.sock

  * `-start`=MILLIS:
    Determines how long socketmaster waits before signaling the old process.
    If MILLIS is set to zero that feature is disabled.

  * `-syslog`:
    Tells socketmaster to log to syslog.

  * `-user`=LOGIN:
    Sets the child process's uid/gid to the given user (looked up in /etc/passwd).
    This command only works when socketmaster is run as root.

## HOW IT WORKS

On start:

 * socketmaster open the -listen port
 * socketmaster starts the -command with the socket on fd 3 and LISTEN_FDS=1
 * as soon as all child processes are gone, socketmaster stops as well

On SIGHUP:

 * socketmaster starts a new -command
 * waits for -start milliseconds
 * sends a SIGTERM to the other child processes

If the new command is not loaded after -start milliseconds the operation is aborted.
All SIGHUP happening at that time are ignored.

Your server is responsible for:

 * opening the socket passed on fd 3
 * not crashing
 * gracefully shutdown on SIGTERM (close the listener, wait for the child
   connections to close)

## ENVIRONMENT

The `LISTEN_*` environment variables follow the systemd socket activation
documentation. The child can use
[the "sd-daemon.h" library](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activation.html).

  * `LISTEN_FDS`:
    Number of file-descriptors passed by socketmaster. The child starts
    counting from 3.
  * `LISTEN_PID`:
    The PID of the target child. If the pids don't match the child should
    ignore the `LISTEN_FDS` environment variable.

## SIGNALS

On SIGHUP, socketmaster starts a new child process, waits for -start and sends a
HUP to the old process.

SIGINT, SIGTERM and SIGQUIT are forwarded to the child processes.

## RELATED PROJECTS

  * [crank](https://github.com/pusher/crank) is the child of socketmaster. It
    supports controlled rolling restarts and dynamic config.
  * [einhorn](https://github.com/stripe/einhorn) is a project with the same goals,
    a wider feature-set and written in ruby.
  * [libancillary](http://www.normalesup.org/~george/comp/libancillary/)
  is a cross-platform C library to work with file-descriptors.
  * [portlisten](http://www.mail-archive.com/kragen-hacks@canonical.org/msg00002.html)
  another approach to port sharing trough UNIX sockets.
  * [systemd](http://freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd/) is an init system / process manager who supports socket activation and delegation.
  * [circus](http://circus.readthedocs.org/en/latest/) is a process manager with socket delegation.
  * [upstart](http://upstart.ubuntu.com/) is an init system / process manager. See http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/precise/en/man7/socket-event.7.html

## BUGS & CODE

Bug reports and other contributions are welcome!
The project's source and issue tracker is located at
<https://github.com/zimbatm/socketmaster/>

## COPYRIGHT

socketmaster is Copyright (C) 2012 PandaStream <http://pandastream.com>
socketmaster is Copyright (C) 2015 zimbatm <http://zimbatm.com>

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
“Software”), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

